Improve Error Handling Documentation (#950)
ocaml/ocaml.org: data/tutorials/lg_08_error_handling.md

```ocaml
# exception Foo of string;;
exception Foo of string

# let i_will_fail () =
  raise (Foo "Oh no!");;

# i_will_fail ();;
Exception: Foo "Oh no!".
```

Here, we add a variant `Foo` to the type `exn`, and create a function that will
raise this exception. Now, how do we handle exceptions? The construct is `try
... with ...`:

```ocaml
# try i_will_fail () with Foo _ -> ();;
- : unit = ()
```

### Predefined Exceptions

The standard library predefines several exceptions, see
[`Stdlib`](/releases/latest/api/Stdlib.html). Here are a few examples:

```ocaml
# 1 / 0;;
Exception: Division_by_zero.
# List.find (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 5];;
Exception: Not_found.
# String.sub "Hello world!" 3 (-2);;
Exception: Invalid_argument "String.sub / Bytes.sub".
# let rec loop x = x :: loop x
val loop : 'a -> 'a list = <fun>
# loop 42;;
Stack overflow during evaluation (looping recursion?).
```

Although the last one doesn't look as an exception, it actually is.
```ocaml
# try loop 42 with Stack_overflow -> [];;
- : int list = []
```

Among them the predefined exceptions of the standard library, the following ones

> are intended to be raised by user written functions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are intended to be raised by user-written functions:
```

```ocaml
exception Exit
exception Not_found
exception Invalid_argument of string
exception Failure of string
```

> * `Exit` terminates your program with a success status, which is 0 in Unices (they do error values)

Reviewer: "they do error values" is confusing here. Did you mean to mention that Unix-like systems have processes returning an exit value? Does this even matter in this tutorial?

# Error Handling

In OCaml, errors can be handled in several ways. This document presents most of the available means. However, handling errors using the effect handlers introduced in OCaml 5 isn't addressed yet.

## Error as Special Values

Don't do that.

> Some languages, most emblematically C, treats certain values as errors. For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some languages, most emblematically C, treat certain values as errors. For
```

... with ...`:

```ocaml
# try i_will_fail () with Foo _ -> ();;
- : unit = ()
```

### Predefined Exceptions

The standard library predefines several exceptions, see
[`Stdlib`](/releases/latest/api/Stdlib.html). Here are a few examples:

```ocaml
# 1 / 0;;
Exception: Division_by_zero.
# List.find (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 5];;
Exception: Not_found.
# String.sub "Hello world!" 3 (-2);;
Exception: Invalid_argument "String.sub / Bytes.sub".
# let rec loop x = x :: loop x
val loop : 'a -> 'a list = <fun>
# loop 42;;
Stack overflow during evaluation (looping recursion?).
```

Although the last one doesn't look as an exception, it actually is.
```ocaml
# try loop 42 with Stack_overflow -> [];;
- : int list = []
```

Among them, the predefined exceptions of the standard library. The following ones
are intended to be raised by user-written functions:
```ocaml
exception Exit
exception Not_found
exception Invalid_argument of string
exception Failure of string
```

* `Exit` terminates your program with a success status, which is 0 in Unices
  (where success is 0 and any other value is an error, that is, errors are

>   handled as special values, like mentionned in the first section)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  handled as special values, like mentioned in the first section)
```

<!-- $MDX skip -->
```ocaml
val foo : a -> b
(** [foo] does this and that, here is how it works, etc.
    @raise Invalid_argument if [a] doesn't satisfy ...
    @raise Sys_error if filesystem is not happy
*)
```

### Stack Traces

To get a stack trace when an unhandled exception makes your program crash, you
need to compile the program in debug mode (with `-g` when calling `ocamlc`, or
`-tag 'debug'` when calling `ocamlbuild`). Then:

```shell
OCAMLRUNPARAM=b ./myprogram [args]
```

And you will get a stack trace. Alternatively, you can call, from within the
program,

```ocaml
let () = Printexc.record_backtrace true
```

### Printing

To print an exception, the module `Printexc` comes in handy. For instance, it
allows the definition of a function such as `notify_user : (unit -> 'a) -> 'a`

> that calls a function and, if it fails, print the exception on `stderr`. If

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that calls a function and, if it fails, prints the exception on `stderr`. If
```

      raise e
```

> OCaml knows how to print its built-in exception, but you can also tell it how to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OCaml knows how to print its built-in exceptions, but you can also tell it how to
```

`Some <printed exception>`, and return `None` otherwise (let the other printers
do the job!).

## Runtime Crashes

Although OCaml is a very safe language, it is possible to trigger unrecoverable
errors at runtime.

### Exceptions not Raised

Under panic circumstances, the native code compiler does a best-effort at
raising meaningful exceptions. However, some error conditions may remain
undetected, which will result in a segmentation fault. This is the specially the
case for stack overflows, which aren't always detected.

> But catching stack overflows is tricky, both in Unix-like systems and under Windows, so the current implementation in OCaml is a best effort that is occasionally buggy.

[Xavier Leroy, October 2021](https://discuss.ocaml.org/t/stack-overflow-reported-as-segfault/8646/8?u=cuihtlauac)

### Bypassing Type-Safety

> OCaml provides a mean to bypass it's own type safety. Don't use it. Here is how

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OCaml provides a mean to bypass its own type safety. Don't use it. Here is how
```

> to shoot in its own feet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to shoot in one's own feet:
```

```

### Language Bugs

When a crash isn't coming from:
* A limitation of the native code compiler
* `Obj.magic`

It may be a language bug. It happens. Here is what to do when this is suspected:

1. Make sure the crash affects both compilers: bytecode and native
1. Write a self-contained and minimal proof-of-concept code which does nothing but triggering the crash
1. File an issue in the [OCaml Bug Tracker in GitHub](https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/issues)

Here is an example of such a bug: https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/issues/7241

### Safe vs. Unsafe Functions

Uncaught exceptions raise runtime crashes. Therefore, there is a tendency to use
the following terminology:
* Function raising exceptions: Unsafe
* Function handling errors in data: Safe

The main means to write such kind of safe error handling functions is to use
either `Option` (next section) or `Result` (following section).

## Using the `Option` Type for Errors

The `Option` module provides the first alternative to exceptions. The `'a
option` datatype allows to express either the availability of data for instance
`Some 42` or the absence of data using `None`, which can represent an error.

> Using `Option` it is possible to write function that return `None` instead of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `Option` it is possible to write functions that return `None` instead of
```

throwing an exception.
```ocaml
let div_opt m n =
  try Some (m / n) with
    Division_by_zero -> None

let find_opt p l =
  try Some (List.find p l) with
    Not_found -> None
```
We can try those functions:

```ocaml
# 1 / 0;;
Exception: Division_by_zero.
# div_opt 42 2;;
- : int option = Some 24
# div_opt 42 0;;
- : int option = None
# List.find (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 5];;
Exception: Not_found.
# find_opt (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 4; 5];;
- : int option = Some 4
# find_opt (fun x -> x mod 2 = 0) [1; 3; 5];;
- : int option = None
```

This can even be turned into a higher-order generic function:
```ocaml
# let try_opt f x = try Some (f x) with _ -> None;;
val try_opt : ('a -> 'b) -> 'a -> 'b option = <fun>
```

It tends to be considered good practice nowadays when a function can fail in
cases that are not bugs (i.e., not `assert false`, but network failures, keys
not present, etc.) to return a more explicit type such as `'a option` or `('a,
'b) result` (see next section).

### Naming Conventions

There are two naming conventions to have two versions of the same partial
function, one raising exception, the other returning an option. In the above

> examples, the convention of the standard library is used add an `_opt` suffix to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
examples, the convention of the standard library is to add an `_opt` suffix to
```

name of the version of the function which returns an option instead of raising
exceptions.
```ocaml
val find: ('a -> bool) -> 'a list -> 'a
(** @raise Not_found *)
val find_opt: ('a -> bool) -> 'a list -> 'a option
```
This is extracted from the `List` module of the standard library.

> However, some project tend to avoid or reduce the usage of exceptions. In such a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, some projects tend to avoid or reduce the usage of exceptions. In such a
```

doesn't count as an invalid substring.

Here the equivalent function, using the same logic but `Option` instead of
exceptions:
```ocaml
let host_opt email =
  match String.index_opt email '@' with
  | Some at_pos -> begin
      let fqdn_pos = at_pos + 1 in
      let fqdn_len = String.length email - fqdn_pos in
      let fqdn = String.sub email fqdn_pos fqdn_len in
      match String.index_opt fqdn '.' with
      | Some host_len -> Some (String.sub fqdn 0 host_len)
      | None -> if fqdn <> "" then Some fqdn else None
    end
  | None -> None
```

Although it qualifies as safe, its legibility isn't improved. Some may even
claim it is worse.

Before showing how to improve this code, we need to explain how `Option.map` and
`Option.bind` work.
```ocaml
val Option.map : ('a -> 'b) -> 'a option -> 'b option
val Option.bind : 'a option -> ('a -> 'b option) -> 'b option
```

`Option.map` applies a function `f` to an option parameter, if it isn't `None`
```ocaml
let map f = function
| Some x -> Some (f x)
| None -> None
```

If `f` can be applied to something, its result is rewrapped into a fresh option.
If there isn't anything to supply to `f`, `None` is forwarded.

> If we don't take arguments order into account, `Option.bind` is almost exacly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we don't take arguments order into account, `Option.bind` is almost exactly
```

the same, except we assume `f` returns an option, therefore there is no need to

> rewrapped its result, it's already an option value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rewrap its result, since it's already an option value:
```

| Some x -> f x
| None -> None
```

`bind` having flipped parameter with respect to `map` allows to use it as custom
let binder:
```ocaml
# let ( let* ) = Option.bind;;
val ( let* ) : 'a option -> ('a -> 'b option) -> 'b option = <fun>
```

Using these mechanisms, here a possible way to rewrite `host_opt`:
```ocaml
# let host_opt email =
  let* fqdn_pos = Option.map (( + ) 1) (String.index_opt email '@') in
  let fqdn_len = String.length email - fqdn_pos in
  let fqdn = String.sub email fqdn_pos fqdn_len in
  String.index_opt fqdn '.'
  |> Option.map (fun host_len -> String.sub fqdn 0 host_len)
  |> function None when fqdn <> "" -> Some fqdn | opt -> opt;;
val host_opt : string -> string option = <fun>
```

This version was picked to illustrate how to use and combine operations on
options allowing to acheive some balance between understandability and
robustness. A couple of observations:
* As in the original `host` function (with exceptions):
   - The calls to `String` functions (`index_opt`, `length` and `sub`) are the
  same and in the same order
   - The same local names are used, with the same types
* There isn't any indentation or pattern-matching left
* Line 1:

>   - right-hand side of `=` : `Option.map` allows adding 1 to the result of `String.index_opt`, if it didn't failed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - right-hand side of `=` : `Option.map` allows adding 1 to the result of `String.index_opt`, if it didn't fail
```

  - left-hand side of `=` : the `let*` syntax turns all the rest of the
  code (from line 2 to the end) into the body of an anonymous function which
  takes `fqdn_pos` as parameter, and the function `( let* )` is called with the
  right-hand side of `=` (as first parameter) and that anonymous function (as
  second parameter).
* Lines 2 and 3: same as in the original
* Line 4: `try` or `match` is removed

> * Line 5: `String.sub` is applied, if the previous step didn't failed, otherwise the error is forwarded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Line 5: `String.sub` is applied, if the previous step didn't fail, otherwise the error is forwarded
```

* Line 6: if nothing was found earlier, and if isn't empty, `fqdn` is returned as a fallback

When used to handle errors with catch statements, it requires some time to get

> used the latter style. The key idea is avoiding or defering from directly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used the latter style. The key idea is avoiding or deferring from directly
```

looking into option values, instead pass them along using _ad-hoc_ pipes (such
as `map` and `bind`). Erik Meijer calls that following the happy path. Visually,
it also looks like to the “early return“ pattern often found in C.

> One of the limitation of the option type is it doesn't record the reason which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the limitations of the option type is it doesn't record the reason which
```

> prevented from having a value. `None` is silent, it doesn't say anything about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
prevented having a return value. `None` is silent, it doesn't say anything about
```

> what went wrong. For this reason, function returning option values should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
what went wrong. For this reason, functions returning option values should
```

document the circumstances under which it may return `None`. Such a
documentation is likely to ressemble to the one required for exceptions using
`@raise`. The `Result` type is intended to fill this gap: manage error in data,
like option values but also provide information on errors, like exceptions. It
is the topic of the next section.

## `Result` Type

The `Result` module of the standard library defines the following type:

```ocaml
type ('a, 'b) result =
  | Ok of 'a
  | Error of 'b
```

A value `Ok x` means that the computation succeeded and produced `x`, and a

> value `Error e` means that it failed and `e` represents whatever information
> collected in the process. Pattern matching can be used to deal with both cases,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
value `Error e` means that it failed and `e` represents whatever error information
has been collected in the process. Pattern matching can be used to deal with both cases,
```

as with any other sum type. However using `map` and `bind` can be more

> convinient, maybe even more as it was with `Option`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
convenient, maybe even more as it was with `Option`.
```

Before taking a look at `Result.map`, let's think about `List.map` and

> `Option.map` under a changed perspective. Both functions behaves like the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Option.map` under a changed perspective. Both functions behave as
```

identity when applied to `[]` or `None`, respectively. That's the only
possibility since those parameters don't carry any data. Which isn't the case in
`Result` with its `Error` constructor. Nethertheless, `Result.map` is

> implemented likewise, on `Error`, it also behaves like the identity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implemented likewise, on `Error`, it also behaves like identity.
```

let file_res = Option.to_result ~none:(`Msg "File not found") file_opt in begin
  let* yaml = Yaml.of_string file_res in
  let* found_opt = Yaml.Util.find key yaml in
  let* found = Option.to_result ~none:(`Msg (key ^ ", key not found")) found_opt in
  found
end |> Result.map_error (Printf.sprintf "%s, error: %s: " path)
```

Here are the types of the involved functions:
```ocaml
val File.read_opt : string -> string option
val Yaml.of_string : string -> (Yaml.value, [`Msg of string]) result
val Yaml.Util.find : string -> Yaml.value -> (Yaml.value option, [`Msg of string]) result
val Option.to_result : none:'e -> 'a option -> ('a, 'e) result
```

- `File.read_opt` is supposed to open a file, read its contents and return it as a
string wrapped in an option, if anything goes wrong `None` is returned.
- `Yaml.of_string` parses a string an turns into an ad-hoc OCaml type
- `Yaml.find` recursively searches a key in a Yaml tree, if found, it returns the
  corresponding data, wrapped in an option
- `Option.to_result` perform conversion of an `option` into a `result`
- Finally, `let*` stands for `Result.bind`

Since functions from the `Yaml` module both returns `result` data, it is easier

> to write a pipe which process that type all along. That's why `Option.to_result`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to write a pipe which processes that type all along. That's why `Option.to_result`
```

val recover : ('e -> 'a option) -> ('a, 'e) result -> ('a, 'e) result = <fun>
```

Although any kind of data can be wrapped as a `result` `Error`, it is
recommended to use that constructor to carry actual errors, for instance:
- `exn`, in which case the result type just makes exceptions explicit.
- `string`, where the error case is a message that indicates what failed.
- `string Lazy.t`, a more elaborate form of error message that is only evaluated
  if printing is required.
- some polymorphic variant, with one case per possible error. This is very
  accurate (each error can be dealt with explicitly and occurs in the type) but
  the use of polymorphic variants sometimes make the code harder to read.

Note that some say the types `result` and `Either.t` are
[ismorphic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isomorphism). Concretely, it means
it's always possible to replace one by the other, like in a completely neutral
refactoring. Values of type `result` and `Either.t` can be translated back and
forth, and appling both translations one after the other, in any order, returns
to the starting value. Nethertheless, this doesn't mean `result` should be used

> in place of `Either.t`, or vise versa. Naming things matters, as punned by Phil

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in place of `Either.t`, or vice versa. Naming things matters, as punned by Phil
```

> Karlton famous quote:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Karlton's famous quote:
```

> There are only two hard things in Computer Science: cache invalidation and
> naming things.

Properly handling errors always makes the code harder to read. Using the right
tools, data and functions can help. Use them.

## `bind` as a Binary Operator

When `Option.bind` or `Result.bind` are used, they are often aliased into a
custom binding operator, such as `let*`. However, it is also possible to use
it as binary operator, which is almost always writen `>>=`. Using `bind` this

> way must be detailed because it is extremly popular in other functional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
way must be detailed because it is extremely popular in other functional
```

> programming language, and specially in OCaml's arch-rival _Which Must Not Be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
programming languages, and specially in OCaml's arch-rival _Which Must Not Be
```

Also, shouldn't that "Must" become "Shall" if you really intend to keep that reference?

Named_.

> Assuming `a` and `b` are valid OCaml expressions, the three pieces of sources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming `a` and `b` are valid OCaml expressions, the following three pieces of sources
```

> code are exactly the same:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code are functionally identical:
```

```ocaml
bind a (fun x -> b)
```
```ocaml
let* x = a in b
```
```ocaml
a >>= fun x -> b
```

It may seem pointless. To make sense, one must look at expressions where several
calls to `bind` are chained. The following three are also equivalent:

```ocaml
bind a (fun x -> bind b (fun y -> c))
```
```ocaml
let* x = a in
let* y = b in
c
```
```ocaml
a >>= fun x -> b >>= fun y -> c
```
Variables `x` and `y` may appear in `c` in the three cases. The first form isn't

> very convinent, it uses a lot of parenthesis. The second one is often the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
very convenient, it uses a lot of parenthesis. The second one is often the
```

prefered one due to its ressemblance with regular local definitions. The third
one is harder to read, `>>=` associates to the right in order to avoid
parenthesis in that precise case, but it's easy to get lost. Nethertheless, it
has some appeal when named functions are used. It looks a bit like good old Unix
pipes:
```ocaml
a >>= f >>= g
```
looks better than:
```ocaml
let* x = a in
let* y = f x in
g y
```

> Writing `x >>= f` is very close to what is found in functionally tained

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing `x >>= f` is very close to what is found in functionally tainted
```

programming languages which have methods and receivers such as Kotlin, Scala,
Go, Rust, Swift or even modern Java, where it would be looking like: `x.bind(f)`.

Here is the same code as presented at the end of the previous section, rewritten
using `Result.bind` as a binary opeator:
```ocaml
File.read_opt path
|> Option.to_result ~none:(`Msg "File not found")
>>= Yaml.of_string
>>= Yaml.Util.find key
>>= Option.to_result ~none:(`Msg (key ^ ", key not found"))
|> Result.map_error (Printf.sprintf "%s, error: %s: " path)
```

By the way, this style is called [Tacit
Programming](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tacit_programming). Thanks to the
associativity priorities of the >>= and |> operators, no parenthesis are needed. 

OCaml has a strict typing discipline, not a strict styling discipline, therefore

> picking the right style is an author's decision. See the [OCaml Programming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
picking the right style is left to the author's decision. See the [OCaml Programming
```

Guidelines](/docs/guidelines) for more details on those matters.

## Assertions

The built-in `assert` instruction takes an expression as an argument and throws
the `Assert_failure` exception if the provided expression evaluates to `false`.
Assuming that you don't catch this exception (it's probably unwise to catch this
exception, particularly for beginners), this results in the program stopping and
printing out the source file and line number where the error occurred. An
example:

```ocaml
# assert (Sys.os_type = "Win32");;
Exception: Assert_failure ("//toplevel//", 1, 0).
```

Running this on Win32, of course, won't throw an error.

Writing `assert false` would just stop your program. This idiom is sometimes
used to indicate [dead code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_code), parts of
the program that must be writen (often for type-checking or pattern matching
completeness) but are unreachable at run time.

> Asserts should be undetstood as executable comments. There aren't supposed to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Asserts should be understood as executable comments. There aren't supposed to
```

| _ -> failwith "this system is not supported"
```

It is right to use `failwith`, using `assert` would be wrong. Here is the dual
example:
```ocaml
function x when true -> () | _ -> assert false
```
Here, it would be wrong to use `failwith` since it requires the compiler to be
bugged or the system to be corrupted for second code path to be executed.
Breakage of the language semantics qualifies as extraordinary circumstances, it
is catastrophic.

# Concluding Remarks

Properly handling errors is a complex matter. It is [cross-cutting

> concern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-cutting_concern), it touches all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
concern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-cutting_concern), touches all
```

> parts of an application and can't be isolated in dedicated module. In contrast

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parts of an application and can't be isolated in a dedicated module. In contrast
```

> to several other main stream languages, OCaml provides several mechanisms to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to several other mainstream languages, OCaml provides several mechanisms to
```

> handled exceptional circumstances, all with good runtime performances and code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
handle exceptional circumstances, all with good runtime performance and code
```

understandability. Using them properly requires some initial learning and

> partice. Later, it always require some thinking, which is good since proper

Reviewer: ```suggestion
practice. Later, it always requires some thinking, which is good since proper
```

management of errors shouldn't ever be overlooked. No error handling is better

> than the others, and is should be matter of adequacy to the context rather some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
than the others, and is should be matter of adequacy to the context rather than
```
